(DOCSP-9477): Define A Realm Schema (#151)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/get-started/define-realm-schema.txt

=====================
Define a Realm Schema
=====================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------
You can create a :manual:`Data Model </data-modeling/>` to define the
structure of the data you are storing in your database. Setting a data
model is a useful technique to enforce :wikipedia:`data

> validation</Data_validation>` on your collection. Although MongoDB and

Reviewer: I would maybe swap the first and second sentence here: lead with problem and go into solution.

Reviewer: I wonder if you can explain in your own words why data validation is important, rather than (or in addition to) linking out to wikipedia in the opening paragraph? You don't necessarily have to explain the concept but I am looking for more "why".

Reviewer 2: To expand on what Chris said, rather than saying it's a "useful technique" consider demonstrating why it's useful. If you do a good job of demonstrating you don't have to say it - the reader will just get that it's useful and will also have a clearer idea of the benefits.

Author: Resolving since this paragraph has been replaced (though I used your suggested ideas)

Realm are both object-centric, there are differences between their Data

> Models, such as the structuring of relationships, supported types, etc.

Reviewer: Maybe:
```suggestion
Models, such as how they structure relationships and which types they support.
```

> This page teaches how to define a Data Model using MongoDB Realm. If you

Reviewer: Perhaps controversial, but, in my opinion, avoid meta-writing (on this page, we will cover...). You already have our attention, so you can get right into the material. 

Meta intro:

> On this page, you will learn to do A, B, and C.

Alternative intro (not meta):

>To do X, there are three major steps:
>- A
>- B
>- C

Author: Resolving since this paragraph has been replaced (though I used your suggested ideas of avoiding meta-writing where possible and using canonical names)

=====================
Define a Realm Schema
=====================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------
You can create a :manual:`Data Model </data-modeling/>` to define the
structure of the data you are storing in your database. Setting a data
model is a useful technique to enforce :wikipedia:`data
validation</Data_validation>` on your collection. Although MongoDB and
Realm are both object-centric, there are differences between their Data

> Models, such as the structuring of relationships, supported types, etc.

Author: Resolving bc this bit is replaced

This page teaches how to define a Data Model using MongoDB Realm. If you
currently have data in `MongoDB Atlas
<http://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas/>`_, you will learn how to translate
this data into a Data Model suitable for Realm mobile development. If
you do not have data in Atlas, you will learn how to use ``Development
Mode`` to create a :doc:`schema</mongodb/document-schemas>` for Atlas so
that you can take your mobile application to production. 

.. note:: 

  There are some differences between `JSON Schema

>   <https://json-schema.org/>`_ and Realm Data Models, such as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <https://json-schema.org/>`_ and Realm Data Models: the
```

>   structure of data in regards to relationships, restrictions on certain

Author: Fixed

>   data types, etc. To learn   more, read the :doc:`Data Model

Reviewer: Avoid vague hand wavy ends of lists with "etc." Be specific.

Author: removed

>   data types, etc. To learn   more, read the :doc:`Data Model

Author: Fixed

  Restrictions</data-model-restrictions>` page. 

Starting with Data in MongoDB
-----------------------------

> You can create a Data Model for Realm if you already have data in

Author: Fixed

MongoDB Atlas. Navigate through the MongoDB Realm UI to sample the data

> in your collection to automatically generate a schema. Then edit that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in your collection and automatically generate a schema. Then edit that
```

> in your collection to automatically generate a schema. Then edit that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in your collection to automatically generate a schema. You can then edit that
```

> schema, and translate it into a Realm Data Model for the language of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
schema and translate it into a Realm Data Model for the language of
```
Or even:
```suggestion
schema or translate it into a Realm Data Model for the language of
```

your choice. 

Procedure
~~~~~~~~~

#. Sign up for Atlas and create a cluster.
#. Create a MongoDB Realm application.
#. Navigate to the ``SDKs`` page to link your MongoDB Realm application to your Atlas Cluster.

> #. In the ``rules`` page, click ``Generate Schema`` to automatically create a schema based on your cluster data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. On the :guilabel:`rules` page, click ``Generate Schema`` to automatically
   create a schema based on your cluster data.
```

- s/In the page/On the page
- The page is capitalized and is a reference to the GUI, so use `guilabel`, not monospace

   .. figure:: /images/generate-schema-based-on-cluster-data.png
      :width: 750px
      :lightbox:

> #. Edit your ``JSON Schema``.

Reviewer 2: What should I edit? What _can_ I edit? When should I think about editing?

   .. figure:: /images/edit-schema-based-on-cluster-data.png
      :width: 750px
      :lightbox:

> #. In the ``SDKs`` page, view your ``JSON Schema`` as a Realm Data Model in your language of choice.

Reviewer 2: What does it mean to view a JSON schema as a Realm Data Model? Where did these come from and what do I do with them?

   .. figure:: /images/translate-jsonschema-into-realm-data-model.png
      :width: 750px
      :lightbox:

> #. Click ``View all Schema Errors`` to see the errors & warnings from translating your ``JSON Schema`` into a Data Model.

Reviewer 2: What are the implications of schema errors? What might cause them? How can I troubleshoot/fix them?

   .. figure:: /images/schema-translation-errors-warnings.png
      :width: 750px
      :lightbox:

> Starting with your application using Development Mode

Reviewer 2: Consider renaming each section with a more canonical name, e.g. Auomatic Schema Generation and Development Mode

-----------------------------------------------------
You can create a schema suitable for MongoDB Atlas so that you can take
your application to production. Through ``Development Mode`` in
the MongoDB Realm UI, you can develop your Data Model. After developing
your Data Model, MongoDB will automatically generate a schema for your

> Atlas cluster. 

Reviewer 2: - What does it mean for a schema to be suitable for MongoDB Atlas?
- "so you can take your application to production" is very sales-y and this page is deep enough that we should be more technical and specific
- This doesn't really tell me much about dev mode other than it's related to data model. What does it do?
- Development mode shouldn't be monospaced, it's not a method, binary, etc. We should also link to its glossary entry using `:term:`

Procedure
~~~~~~~~~

#. Sign up for Atlas and create a cluster.
#. Create a MongoDB Realm application.

> #. Navigate to the ``SDKs`` page to link your MongoDB Realm application to your Atlas Cluster.

Reviewer 2: Same comments here as in the first procedure

> #. Enable ``Development Mode``, automatically, by navigating to the ``SDKs`` page.

Reviewer 2: - What does automatically mean in this context? When I get to this page it automatically enables?
- What is development mode? Why am I enabling it?

Author: * Removed automatically because it is unnecessary
* In the new rendition I explained in the `overview` that development mode allows you to create both the schemas (realm database schema and JSON schema) that you need.

   .. figure:: /images/enable-schema-development-mode.png
      :width: 750px
      :lightbox:

> #. Create a Data Model in the language of your choice with the Realm Client SDKs.

Reviewer 2: How do I create a data model with the SDK?

Author: Replaced that text w/ "Copy the code to create a Realm Schema in the SDK of your choice, and paste it into your mobile application source code."

   .. figure:: /images/define-your-data-models.png
      :width: 750px
      :lightbox:

> #. Alter ``Validation Settings`` on the ``Sync`` page.

Reviewer 2: Which settings? What do they mean? What do I set them to?

Author: @cbush will have docs on this per https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/DOCSP-9480 

Chris, can you shed some light on whether the wording step needs to be updated right now?

   .. figure:: /images/alter-validation-settings.png
      :width: 750px
      :lightbox:
      
#. Click ``Save``.

> #. A modal will appear, click ``View my JSON Schema`` to view your generated schema for Atlas.

Reviewer 2: Avoid future tense. Instead be descriptive. Which modal? e.g. "On the confirmation modal, click..."

Author: great advice - copied verbatim

=====================
Define a Realm Schema
=====================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In modern applications, users update their data continuously. Users also
expect their data to be available and accurate cross-platform and in

> realtime. Storing your data in `MongoDB Atlas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
real time. Storing your data in `MongoDB Atlas
```

<http://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas/>`_ ensures the availability of

> your data. Also, using schemas ensures the accuracy of the data by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your data. Using schemas ensures the accuracy of the data by
```

performing type and format checks on fields. 

There are two different types of schemas you will need: a :doc:`Realm
Database Schema </data-model/realms>`, for your mobile application, and
a :doc:`JSON Schema </mongodb/document-schemas>`, for your MongoDB Atlas

> cluster. 

Reviewer: Break into point form list?

Author: Good idea - broken into list

You may have already started storing your application data on MongoDB

> Atlas, in which case you can generate a JSON Schema through ``Automated

Reviewer: >If you have already started ..., you can

Author: Fixed

Schema Generation with MongoDB Realm`` and translate that JSON Schema
into the Realm Database Schema you need for mobile. Alternatively, if you
have not started storing your application data yet in Atlas,
``Development Mode with MongoDB Realm`` allows you to create both
the schemas that you will need.

.. note:: 

  There are some differences between `JSON Schema

>   <https://json-schema.org/>`_ and Realm Database Schemas: the structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <https://json-schema.org/>`_ and Realm Database Schemas: namely, the structure
```

Author: Resolving since this sentence has been changed

Author: Resolving since this sentence has been changed

>   of relationships, restrictions on certain data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  of relationships and restrictions on certain data
```

Author: Resolving - the sentence changed but I used this verbiage

===================
Define a Data Model
===================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In modern applications, users update their data continuously. Users also
expect their data to be available and accurate cross-platform and in
real time. Storing your data in `MongoDB Atlas
<http://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas/>`_ ensures the availability of
your data. Using schemas ensures the accuracy of the data by

> performing type and format checks on fields. 

Author: I think that belongs in the sync page, the goal of this doc is not particularly to give the incentive to use schemas, but rather - procedurally explain how to translate the two schema types

> performing type and format checks on fields. 

Author: To address your points:

* A data model does not help update data continuously 
* Atlas scalability is independent to data models. But Atlas scalability is the solution to the problem of the previous sentence "Users also expect their data to be available ..." (The same way realm data models are a solution to the problem of the previous sentence "...and accurate cross-platform and in real time"). I think this sentence is at best - important enough to keep for narrative and clarity of the big picture, and at worst - not detrimental to the understanding of the procedure outlined in the doc.

> performing type and format checks on fields. 

Author: And then for your overview points:

* We've sort of went back and forth on who this doc caters to and the answer we've come up with is that the doc caters to users who know what a data model is and already have either a realm schema or realm object model and need the other one. 

The previous rendition of this doc did have more explanation on what data models are, and we agreed that it didn't make sense for this doc. I really think further explaining data model concepts and how it impacts application development is the wrong direction for this doc and will make readers think this doc is for a more beginner reader.

> performing type and format checks on fields. 

Reviewer: Just my opinion here: I think it's fine to use a lead-in sentence that orients the reader by starting in the very general then contrasting into the specific. We don't need to justify every general intro statement like "In modern applications, users update their data continuously." That's being stated as a fact here for rhetorical purposes.

There are two different types of schemas you will need:

* A :doc:`Realm Object Model </data-model/realms>`, for your mobile application.

> * A :doc:`Realm Schema </mongodb/document-schemas>`, for your MongoDB Atlas cluster. 

Author: * I don't like the suggested sentence "MongoDB Realm allows you to define, synchronize, and enforce your data model in two ways:" because it implies that having both data models is only an option, but to my knowledge, you do need both data models in order to sync your data between Atlas and your mobile app. 

How do you feel about: "There are two different types of data models you will need to sync your mobile application to your Atlas cluster"

* I've altered the bullets roughly verbatim as you've suggested.

> * A :doc:`Realm Schema </mongodb/document-schemas>`, for your MongoDB Atlas cluster. 

Reviewer 2: You do technically need both for mobile apps, but:
- Realm also serves web/backend apps which don't need Realm Object Models ever. More than don't need, they _can't_ use the ROM to define their data model because they don't use Realm Database.
- if you're developing a mobile app you can use the ROM exclusively because the sync process automatically updates your Realm Schema (in dev mode) without any extra work from you.

In that sense they're two aspects of the same thing - the underlying data model - and you do only ever need to use one or the other.

If you have already started storing your application data on MongoDB
Atlas, you can generate a Realm Schema through ``Automated
Schema Generation with MongoDB Realm`` and translate that Realm Schema

> into the Realm Object Model you need for mobile. Alternatively, if you

Author: I absolutely think the line "you can generate a Realm Schema through Automated Schema Generation with MongoDB Realm and translate that Realm Schema into the Realm Object Model you need for mobile" is needed

This sentence further draws on the point that you need a Realm Object Model for Mobile and a Realm Schema for MongoDB Atlas and although we've already mentioned it, I think it's important in writing technical documentation to mention potentially confusing things multiple times.

> into the Realm Object Model you need for mobile. Alternatively, if you

Author: Altered to - 

If you have already started storing your application data on MongoDB
Atlas, **MongoDB Realm can generate** a Realm Schema through Automated
Schema Generation with MongoDB Realm and translate that Realm Schema
into the Realm Object Model you need for mobile.

have not started storing your application data yet in Atlas,
``Development Mode with MongoDB Realm`` allows you to create both

> the schemas that you will need.

Author: Well, It's not really a decision. You don't choose development mode or automatic schema generation. You either have data in your atlas cluster (meaning that you have a realm schema and you need a realm object model requiring you to use Automatic Schema Generation) **or** you don't have data yet/you're taking a mobile-first approach and you need to translate your realm object model into a realm schema, requiring you do use development mode (or translate it by hand)

> the schemas that you will need.

Reviewer: Can you put that comment into the text itself so that it's more clear to future readers? I think it's a fair point that the guidance is unclear.

> the schemas that you will need.

Reviewer 2: The choice is between:
- Flow 1: Define a Data Model using Realm Schema
- Flow 2: Define a Data Model using Realm Object Models

It happens that mobile devs will 90% of the time use Flow 2 (especially because the in-app onboarding will guide them to) but they could just as well use Flow 1 if they want.

Flow 1 doesn't require data to already be in MongoDB Atlas. The _automatic schema generation_ feature is what requires you to already have data, and you don't need to use automatic schema generation to follow Flow 1. That said, it's very handy to generate the schemas automatically, so our opinionated stance should be to guide users to add data to a collection and generate their Realm Schema based on that.

See my previous comment on this (https://github.com/mongodb/docs-realm/pull/151#discussion_r405103803)

.. note:: 

  There are some differences between `Realm Schema
  <https://json-schema.org/>`_ and Realm Object Models including the
  structure of relationships and restrictions on certain data types. To
  learn more, read the :doc:`Realm Object Model Restrictions
  </realm-database-restrictions>` page. 

> Automated Schema Generation with MongoDB Realm

Author: `Define a Realm Schema` isn't accurate either, because you're not fully defining a realm schema. Since you have data in atlas, the schema is auto-generated and then translated into an object model. `Define a Realm Schema` also does not get the feature of translating from r-schema to r-object model across. 

But it's difficult to encompass all of that in a title, hence the follow-up paragraph.

I believe `Define a Realm Schema` was my original title but we decided to change it.

> Automated Schema Generation with MongoDB Realm

Reviewer: How about `Generate a Schema Automatically with MongoDB Realm`? Simple restructure of existing content to action phrase.

----------------------------------------------

You can create a Realm Schema if you already have data in MongoDB Atlas.
Navigate through the MongoDB Realm UI to sample the data in your

> collection to automatically generate a schema. You can then edit that

Author: Fixed verbatim

schema and translate it into a Realm Object Model for the language of

> your choice. 

Author: Sure - I've altered the sentence to:

`You can then edit that
schema and once you are done editing, MongoDB Realm automatically
translates it into a Realm Object Model for the language of your choice.`

I think that captures it

Procedure
~~~~~~~~~

.. include:: /includes/steps/auto-schema-generation.rst

> Development Mode with MongoDB Realm

Author: This procedure does not teach how to define a realm object model, but rather how to translate a realm object model into a realm schema using dev-mode.

What do you think @cbush

> Development Mode with MongoDB Realm

Reviewer: The point stands that this heading could be more of an action, so maybe in that case:

>*Translate a Realm Object Model into a Schema Using Dev Mode*

-----------------------------------

Through :guilabel:`Development Mode` in the MongoDB Realm UI, you can develop

> your Realm Object Model to use for your mobile application. After developing your Realm Object Model,

Reviewer 3: I think this feels slightly off to. Development mode is set in the UI, but supports developing starting from your mobile application codebase. However from the sentence
 to me it feels like Realm Object Model will be "developed" in the UI

Maybe:
> "Through Development Mode, you can start developing with your Realm Object Model in your mobile application."

Author: That makes sense - I fixed it to be your suggested sentence ^

> MongoDB will automatically generate a Realm Schema for your Atlas

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MongoDB Realm automatically generates a Realm Schema for your Atlas
```
- Avoid future tense - prefer descriptive, action-oriented present tense, especially in procedures
- Realm does it, not our company/database 😉

> cluster. 

Reviewer 2: - Dev mode isn't a UI feature, so let's not emphasize the UI here. (You'll likely be able to enable/disable it via the Admin API too.)
- I think this could use a bit more context on what it means to "develop your Realm Object Model to use for your mobile application". i.e. write RealmObject classes (language-specific), use Realm Mobile Database, etc.

Reviewer: I thought it was a UI feature insofar as it's something you can enable/disable in the UI? If not, my mistake for suggesting :guilabel: in the first place.

Author: I've removed most of the emphasis on UI, but roughly it is a UI feature right now, in the future if it becomes an Admin API feature we can/should change this doc.

Reviewer 2: The UI is a wrapper around the Admin API, so everything the UI does is available through the Admin API. Regardless, dev mode isn't so much a "UI feature" as "a feature that you can configure in the UI".
